Distinguishing risk from emotional communication,
seeing what's really going on.
You may have seen this.
A young person becomes aggressive.
They walk out,
they refuse to engage,
and straightway
the focus goes to risk.
This needs managing.
This needs stopping.
And sometimes,
that's absolutely right.
But let me ask you something.
What if that behavior is also telling you something,
because one of the biggest challenges in this profession
is knowing the difference between behavior that presents risk
and behavior that is communicating distress.
And the truth is,
they often look exactly the same.
A young person storms out of the room.
Is that risky behavior?
Or are they overwhelmed
and trying to cope?
Someone becomes verbally aggressive.
Is that a safety concern
or a response to feeling threatened?
What's really going on here
is that behavior can be two things at once.
It can be unsafe,
and it can be communication,
and this is where we sometimes get it wrong.
We go straight into control mode.
We focus on stopping the behavior,
enforcing boundaries,
managing the situation.
And again,
sometimes that's necessary.
But if that's all we do,
we miss what's driving it.
Behavior is often communication.
There is usually a reason behind the behavior,
and if we don't understand that reason,
the behavior is likely to repeat.
What this means in practice is holding both things in mind at the same time.
First,
is anyone at risk right now?
If the answer is yes,
safety comes first,
always.
But alongside that,
we also ask,
what might this behavior be telling me?
Because
if we only respond to the risk,
we manage the moment
if we understand the communication.
We change the pattern.
Think about a time when you felt overwhelmed or misunderstood.
If someone came in strong,
raised voice,
pressure,
control.
It probably didn't help.
It may even have made things worse.
It's no different here.
For the people we support,
especially those with trauma,
strong adult responses can feel like threat.
That's when we see escalation,
fight,
flight,
freeze.
Not because they're choosing to make things harder,
but because they feel unsafe.
So what does good practice look like?
It means setting clear boundaries when needed,
but doing it in a calm,
measured way.
It means not ignoring risk,
but also not losing sight of the person behind the behavior.
It means being able to pause,
even briefly,
and think.
What's happening here underneath this?
Because
this is where safeguarding really sits,
not just in reacting to behavior,
but in understanding it.
And when we get that balance right,
we reduce escalation,
we build trust,
and we respond in a way that actually makes a difference.